Hello again!
In this video, we are going to look at new parallel algorithms. In the last video, we said that some
of the algorithm functions from  had to be rewritten to support execution policies.
So we are going to look at those.
The first one is accumulate.
This takes a range of iterators and an initial value.
It will add the value of each element in the
range to that initial value and return the sum.
By default, the plus operator is used for performing the addition.
So if we have an initial value of zero,
then we will get the sum of the values of all the elements.
We can also pass a callable object as an additional fourth argument, if we want to perform a different
operation.
For example, if we want to get the product of the values of the elements, we could pass
one as the initial value and pass a callable object that performs multiplication.
So here is a simple example of accumulate.
We have a vector which we are going to perform the accumulate on.
Then we call accumulate.
We pass the elements, which is the entire vector in this case,
and the initial value of zero.
And we expect that will give us the total of the value of the elements in the vector, which is 36.
The reason why accumulate had to be rewritten is to do with the way that it was specified.
The specification
says that it must execute sequentially and also that the execution must be performed from left to right.
So if we have a vector with elements one, two, three, four,
it will have to execute it
by doing one plus two, then add three to the result of that,
then add four to the result of that and
so on.
This means that each addition must be complete before the next one can start.
So obviously that is not compatible with a parallel implementation.
It is also not compatible with a vectorized implementation,
because vectorization means that the instructions
take more than two arguments,
and the specification says that each operation can only take two arguments.
To overcome these problems, C++ provides a new function called reduce.
This works exactly the same way as accumulate.
The difference is that the execution is not guaranteed to be sequential or in left-to-right [order].
We can also apply a policy.
So let's try parallel and vectorized...
And there it is. OK?
So reduce will actually support all the execution policies.
If we ask for sequential execution, then
it is just going to do it as one big sequence of additions.
If we ask for parallel execution, then it is going to break it down into four single additions,
which
can all be performed at the same time.
So it will be one plus two and three plus four and five plus six and seven plus eight,
and then combine
the results to get the answer.
If we ask for vectorized execution, then it will use an instruction which will add four numbers in a
single instruction and then add another four numbers in a single instruction.
And then we can do these vector executions in parallel.
So we have parallel and vectorized.
So we are doing two vectorized additions at the same time.
So we are doing one plus two plus three plus four in a single instruction and five plus six plus seven plus eight
as another separate instruction which can run at the same time.
When reduce has a parallel execution policy,
it breaks the operations down into something that looks
like a tree.
So we have eight numbers that we want to add.
This is broken down into two additions of four numbers, and then each of those is broken down into
four additions of two numbers.
And then you cannot go any lower because you must have at least two numbers in an addition.
So all of these additions are going to be performed, then the results will be combined.
So the result, one and two will be combined with the result of three and four give the result of adding
one and two and three and four.
Then that will be combined with all the operations on the other side of the tree and then we get the
final results.
This is actually a very important concept
in parallel programming.
You split the program up into lots of operations, which run separately at
the same time,
and then you have a reduce step which will combine together all these partial results
and give you the final answer.
We said that the operations may not be performed in sequence.
If we are performing addition it does not
matter,
but if we are doing something like subtraction, then it is going to give the wrong answer.
So there are some restrictions on the operator we can use.
The operator must have some properties which are known by mathematicians as associativity and commutativity.
If it is commutative,
that means the order does not matter.
So two plus three is the same as three plus two.
If it is associative, then grouping operations together does not change the result.
This is true for adding integers, multiplying them.
It is not true for subtraction and is also not true for floating point.
Another function that was rewritten was partial_sum. This is used for populating a second vector.
Each
element in the second vector is the sum of the corresponding elements so far in the first vector.
So if we have a vector one, two, three, four, the first element of the result will be one.
The second will be one plus two.
The third will be one plus two plus three.
And the fourth will be one plus two plus two plus four.
So each element in v2 contains "the sum
so far" from v1.
So here is an example. We have the same starting vector. We have another vector that we are going to
populate. In this case, I am making sure that the populated vector is the same size as the original vector.
So we are not going to have any problems with invalid element accesses.
You could also use a back_inserter
in this case.
However, you cannot use a back_inserter with an execution policy.
So that is why I am doing it this way.
We then call
partial_sum. We give the element range again.
That is all the elements in the first vector.
And then the start of the target vector.
So we are going to start from the beginning of the second vector.
And then you can see that each element is the sum of the elements so far.
So the first one is one, the
second element is one plus two.
The third element is one plus two plus three and so on.
And the last element is the sum of all the elements.
There are actually two different algorithms which replace partial_sum.
One is inclusive_scan.
So this does exactly the same as partial sum, except it supports policies.
So we can put a policy in
here.
And that all works.
The other C++17 version of partial_sum is called exclusive_scan.
This is a bit more complicated.
It excludes the current element from the sum,
but it also adds an extra element which is supplied
as a fourth argument.
So in this case, we're calling exclusive scan with a fourth argument of minus one.
We have this vector here, but it is actually going to be treated as though it was like this,
with the
first element, minus one, and then last element has been dropped.
This is probably a bit hard to understand.
I think the best way to explain it is to show the output.
So the first element is the imaginary first element, minus one.
The second element is the sum of minus
one and the actual first element, which gives zero.
And we add zero, two. And three is five, five and
four is nine and so on.
It is the same as if we did an inclusive_scan...
of this vector. So the first element has been replaced by minus one.
The rest have been shuffled along and the last element has been dropped.
(So if I change the printed output!)
So the first element is minus one, second element is minus one plus one,
third element is those plus
two, fourth element plus three, fifth plus four and so on.
But the best way to appreciate this is to experiment with it yourselves.
It may seem rather a strange thing to do, but it is actually very useful in numeric programming.
There it is again.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!